PyTorch Tutorial: Data Augmentations and Learning Rates
Overview
This video focuses on training techniques for convolutional classifiers to enhance performance, especially when pre-trained weights are unavailable or not applicable.
Key topics include data augmentation and learning rate scheduling.
Key Concepts
Data Augmentation

Definition: Data augmentation involves modifying training images to create variations while preserving their content, which helps prevent overfitting by making it harder for the model to memorize specific pixel values.
Techniques:
Random Rotation: Rotates images by a specified degree.
Horizontal Flip: Flips images horizontally.
Auto Augment: A predefined set of transformations that apply various augmentations randomly based on policies (e.g., ImageNet policy).
Importance: Expands the effective dataset size, helping models generalize better by exposing them to different perspectives of the same data.
Copy
from torchvision import transforms

transform = transforms.Compose([
    transforms.RandomRotation(30),
    transforms.RandomHorizontalFlip(),
    transforms.AutoAugment(transforms.AutoAugmentPolicy.IMAGENET),
    transforms.ToTensor(),
    transforms.Normalize((0.5,), (0.5,))
])
Learning Rate Scheduling

Definition: Learning rate scheduling adjusts the learning rate during training to optimize convergence and prevent instability.
Common Schedulers:
StepLR: Reduces the learning rate by a fixed factor (gamma) every specified number of epochs.
Cosine Annealing: Gradually decreases the learning rate following a cosine curve over a defined number of steps.
Cyclic Learning Rate: Cycles the learning rate between a minimum and maximum value.
ReduceLROnPlateau: Reduces the learning rate when a metric (like validation loss) has stopped improving.
Copy
from torch.optim.lr_scheduler import StepLR

scheduler = StepLR(optimizer, step_size=10, gamma=0.1)
Training Process

The training loop involves applying data augmentations and learning rate schedules to improve model performance.
Models are trained without pre-trained weights initially to establish a baseline performance, followed by experiments with various augmentations and learning rate adjustments.
Performance Evaluation

After training, models are evaluated based on validation and test accuracies.
Data augmentation and proper learning rate scheduling can lead to significant improvements in accuracy.
Observations and Results

Initial training without augmentations resulted in overfitting, with validation accuracy peaking around 49%.
Implementing data augmentations (rotation and flipping) increased validation accuracy to around 60%.
Using Auto Augment alone yielded a validation accuracy of approximately 56.6%.
Combining both augmentations led to a validation accuracy of 64.91%.
Adjusting the learning rate dynamically helped avoid spikes in loss and improved convergence.
Final Remarks

The tutorial emphasizes the importance of tuning training parameters, such as learning rates and data augmentations, to achieve better model performance.
It highlights that improving training techniques can lead to substantial gains in accuracy, demonstrating the effectiveness of these methods even without pre-trained models.
Conclusion
Data augmentation and learning rate scheduling are crucial techniques for enhancing the performance of convolutional classifiers, especially when data is limited or not well-matched to pre-trained models.
The next video will explore utilizing additional unlabeled data to further improve model accuracy through unsupervised learning techniques.